Update `History of osu!/2009` (#9943)
ppy/osu-wiki: wiki/History_of_osu!/2009/en.md

## January

> osu! makes its way to the iPhone due to a port done by [nuudles](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/21312). The project was given its own [subforum](https://osu.ppy.sh/community/forums/47).[^iphone]

Author: For what it's worth, the iPhone subforum linked above is unavailable to non-admins.

## February

On 14 February, the fourth iteration of the osu! community meeting was held regarding how beatmaps should be moderated, a new upcoming localisation feature and questions about expanding the osu! team.[^community-meeting-4]

A [kudosu](/wiki/Kudosu) system was implemented to ease beatmap [modding](/wiki/Modding) in the [beatmap ranking procedure](/wiki/Beatmap_ranking_procedure). Mappers were able to reward people with points called kudosu for giving useful and constructive criticism. 3 kudosu points could be traded with 1 kudosu star. These stars could be used to put the beatmap on a higher rank on the [Beatmap Appreciation Team (BAT)](/wiki/People/Beatmap_Appreciation_Team) modding priority list.[^kudosu-1]

## March

3 updates brought a lot of changes to osu! this month. The first one included filtering options for multiplayer lobbies, as well as a chat option to filter messages if offensive language appeared. If enabled, each chat message containing forbidden entries would be replaced with words defined by a certain list.[^stable-b622]

> In the next update being published on 21 March, [kiai time](/wiki/Gameplay/Kiai_time) was added, enabling mappers to emphasise strong parts of songs with star fountains.[^stable-b631]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next update published on 21 March, [kiai time](/wiki/Gameplay/Kiai_time) was added, enabling mappers to emphasise strong parts of songs with star fountains.[^stable-b631]
```

> On 26 March, osu! received support for the TaTaCon wii Taiko drum controller and Wiimote game/menu control support (Catch The Beat only).[^stable-b639][^custom-changelog]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On 26 March, osu! received support for the TaTaCon Wii Taiko drum controller and Wiimote game/menu control support (Catch The Beat only).[^stable-b639][^custom-changelog]
```

## April

> This month, the registered user count exceeded the milestone of 100,000 users.[^user-count]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The number of registered users exceeded 100,000.[^user-count]
```

## May

A change in the kudosu system allowed users to gift kudosu stars to any beatmap, not just their own ones like previously.[^kudosu-change]

Among other changes, osu! got an update this month adding widescreen support and the [Autopilot](/wiki/Gameplay/Game_modifier/Autopilot) mod. Enabling the Autopilot mod would take over the cursor movement and the player would only need to control the tapping.[^stable-b674]

## June

> Due to a change to the [Beatmap submission system](/wiki/Beatmapping/Beatmap_submission) users were no longer able to upload any modifications to a beatmap after it was modded. There were cases of beatmaps becoming ranked without the BAT member who ranked the beatmap knowing that it contained [rule-breaking changes](/wiki/Ranking_criteria).[^bss-update]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to a change to the [beatmap submission system](/wiki/Beatmapping/Beatmap_submission), users were no longer able to upload any modifications to a beatmap after it was modded. There were cases of beatmaps ranked by the BAT members not knowing they contained [rule-breaking changes](/wiki/Ranking_criteria).[^bss-update]
```

> Before, osu! was only available in English. With the new localisation system coming into place, users became able to translate the game client. They could download a file containing the game's text lines, modify it to their language and ask the file to be integrated into the game client.[^client-localisation][^stable-b695]

Reviewer: not sure if just saying "before" is enough to introduce the change [before = before what?]
```suggestion
Up to this point, osu! was only available in English. With the new localisation system coming into place, users became able to translate the game client. They could download a file containing the game's text lines, translate it into their language, and then ask for the file to be integrated into the game client.[^client-localisation][^stable-b695]
```

> ## July

Author: A point that I thought was not worth to include was the tool [pTransl made by peppy](https://osu.ppy.sh/community/forums/topics/15603?n=1) to make users able to translate osu!stream. For completeness, I'm mentioning it here.

The tool was [replaced](https://osu.ppy.sh/community/forums/topics/104342?n=1) by Google Docs in 2012.

Reviewer 2: pTransl was awesome though :(

On 14 July, osu! news became available as a [RSS feed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RSS).[^rss-news]

Two updates this month brought a new mouse precision toggle option for low sensitivities as well as new command parameters and shortcuts to simplify [storyboard scripting](/wiki/Storyboard/Scripting) in osu!.[^stable-b753c][^stable-b709]

> The database was upgraded with an additional 32 GB SSD to support more storage going forward.[^server-upgrade]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The server database was upgraded with an additional 32 GB SSD to support more storage going forward.[^server-upgrade]
```

> After a first initial test for Taiko online rankings was done in March, ranking statistics became viewable per mode on the osu! website.[^per-mode-ranking][^stable-b622] Prior to that, only the [osu! game mode](/wiki/Game_mode/osu!) had online rankings.

Author: I do write here that only osu! had online rankings back then, though I haven't found a source if that is actually the case. If someone could verify if this was the case (i.e. CtB had no rankings), I would highly appreciate this.

Reviewer: no idea -- this needs a wider audience to take a look at, or peppy's attention

## August

The Twitter account [@osustatus](https://twitter.com/osustatus) was created, intended as a status page to inform about issues with [Bancho](/wiki/Bancho_(server)) and the website.[^osustatus]

osu! received a new `LoopType` parameter for looping storyboard objects and a [Relax](/wiki/Gameplay/Game_modifier/Relax) mod for the Taiko game mode in an update on August 12. Additionally, [AiMod](/wiki/Client/Beatmap_editor/AiMod) was published in a pre-release version, a tool for detecting issues in beatmaps.[^stable-b825]

## September

Updates this month integrated new features, where among the changes were widescreen support for song select,[^stable-b904a] friend support on the website,[^custom-changelog] and the Taiko mascot [pippidon](/wiki/Mascots#pippi) would now be displayed in the top-left corner while playing.[^stable-b898]

> As of 6 September 2009, all [Taiko scores were reset](https://osu.ppy.sh/community/forums/topics/17118?n=1) to allow for an improved scoring algorithm to be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of 6 September, all [Taiko scores were reset](https://osu.ppy.sh/community/forums/topics/17118?n=1) to allow for an improved scoring algorithm to be used.
```

## October

> A new ranking info screen was added which layed the groundwork for the later implemented ranking chart system.[^stable-b1077][^custom-changelog]

Reviewer: additionally, I would link to Beatmap_Spotlights/Chart_Assembly_Team here, since we don't have an article about the charts specifically
```suggestion
A new ranking info screen was added which laid the groundwork for the ranking chart system implemented at a later point.[^stable-b1077][^custom-changelog]
```

Reviewer: yeah that is a stretch

> [Larto](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/12328) published the beatmap [Imogen Heap - Sweet Religion](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/10000#osu/97517), meaning that the total count of submitted beatmaps reached 10,000.[^beatmap-10k]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The 10,000th beatmap was submitted, [Imogen Heap - Sweet Religion](https://osu.ppy.sh/beatmapsets/10000#osu/97517) by [Larto](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/12328).[^beatmap-10k]
```

> In addition to osu! news in July 2009, the [changelog](/wiki/Changelog) became available as a RSS feed on 25 October too.[^rss-changelog]

Author: I'm not entirely sure how to handle RSS stuff, since the [Changelog](https://osu.ppy.sh/wiki/en/Changelog#history) article already has a history entry.

## November

Thanks to an update to osu! on 18 October, users became able to add comments to a [replay](/wiki/Gameplay/Replay).[^custom-changelog] Furthermore, a feature was added to support holding down `Shift` while taking a screenshot to automatically upload it.[^stable-b1118]

Two milestones were reached this month. 50,000,000 ranked plays in total were accomplished on 15 November and as of 20 November, osu! had 200,000 registered users.[^play-count][^user-count-2]

## December

> This month, the [Mapping Assistance Team (MAT)](/wiki/People/Mapping_Assistance_Team) was introduced. They were responsible for selecting [pending beatmaps](/wiki/Beatmap/Category#work-in-progress-and-pending) that have an acceptable quality and recommending them for being ranked in the [forum modding](/wiki/Modding/Forum_modding) system by the [BAT](/wiki/People/Beatmap_Appreciation_Team).[^mat]

Author: ```suggestion
This month, the [Mapping Assistance Team (MAT)](/wiki/People/Mapping_Assistance_Team) was introduced. They were responsible for selecting [pending beatmaps](/wiki/Beatmap/Category#work-in-progress-and-pending) that had an acceptable quality and recommending them for being ranked in the [forum modding](/wiki/Modding/Forum_modding) system by the [BAT](/wiki/People/Beatmap_Appreciation_Team).[^mat]
```
🤔
